[Music] Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger.
Today we want to have a look at the role
of the term "nothing," the concept of nothing,
in mathematics, which historically has been very
interesting. It's a kind of nebulous concept, of
course, that a lot of people have had different
points of view towards, and what I'd like
to do is introduce a really dramatically new
way—an additional new way—of thinking about
nothing and its role in mathematics. So,
in preparation for a discussion of that,
let's have a look at some of the history.
A good place to go back to is the ancient
Babylonians. Babylonians were sort of the geniuses
of the ancient world long before the Greeks came
on the scene. They had a very highly developed,
original, and powerful mathematics.
So around 3,000 BC, their culture
developed in the Mesopotamian area, between
the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and they had
a sexagesimal system, which means base 60—very
interesting—and they also used a floating-point
positional system very much like the one we
do. So they used basically only two symbols:
there was a symbol for one and a symbol for ten,
which they wrote with this sort of wedge-like
implement that they used to write on clay tablets.
To express 47, they would make four of these tens
and seven of these ones, and they would arrange
them in something like this, and that would be
47. So they used these to represent the numbers
from 1 to 59—they are the corresponding digits
for the Babylonians, just as the numbers 1 to 9
are for us. Well, actually, we use zero as well.
So then, otherwise, what they did is they had a
base 60 representation so that they would clump
their numbers in various places linearly. So this
representation here—there'd be a 47 visible there,
and here you can see a 21, and here there's
some kind of space, and over here there's a
2. So this would represent, for them, well, 47,
21 times 60, so this would be the 60s column
and 0 60 squares and 2 60 cubes. So altogether,
2 times 60 cubed plus 21 times 60 (we'll ignore
this one) plus 47 for a total of
what we would call 27,037. Now,
an interesting aspect of their arithmetic
was that they didn't really have a very
clear or concrete representation of the decimal
point, so there was some kind of ambiguity in
their system. On another occasion, they could
have represented this as being 21 ones, 0 60s,
2 60 squares, and 47 over 60. This gave them
a flexibility that was actually quite useful.
So what's interesting for us is their use of the
space to represent zeros. They had this very clear
idea—they were going to work with powers of
60, and if they were missing a power of 60,
they'd just leave a space. They weren't going to
put anything there. The reader should be able to
see that there's a space in here and sort of
register that they're missing the 60 squares,
but they have 60s and 60 cubes. So this is
going back quite a long time, and so this
really is a use of the decimal kind of system,
very much like the Hindu-Arabic one that we use,
with the notable exception that they're
working in base 60 and that they don't
have an explicit form for a placeholder, but
they're using the space pretty much exactly in
the corresponding way. So they can certainly deal
with numbers pretty much the same way that we can.
Now, the Babylonian culture lasted a long
time—we're talking about a several thousand-year
span—and in the later part of this time frame,
around 300 BC, there was a great flowering of
astronomy and work in that direction. And part
of that story was a very interesting development:
the Babylonians started to use an explicit
symbol to represent this placeholder that
previously they just had a space for. So this
is actually the first really recorded use of
a symbol for zero, which predates the Hindu
development, actually. So here's what they did:
they employed basically a similar kind of
symbol to their number two—just these two
sort of wedges coming down—but they're now
at an angle and they're kind of a little bit
above the regular reading of things. So they
could see that as we're reading this here,
this symbol here represents not an explicit number
two but rather a placeholder for the zero. So they
could read this as 2 times 60 squared plus 0
times 60 plus 24, which would be our 7,224.
Now, this symbol here really is only being used as
a placeholder, okay? It's to make more explicit,
more unambiguous, the fact that there is nothing
in this place, particularly right here. It's
not the case that this symbol was used as a
separate number—that was the development that
the Hindus get credit for, okay? So they did
not have this idea that there's a new number,
which is these two slanted symbols. Nevertheless,
it's really the first use of the term zero,
and the astronomers actually did
employ this notation. However,
it was never really equated with nothingness.
We didn't have this idea that there's nothing
and that nothing is actually represented
by this particular symbol explicitly.
Now, many histories of mathematics concentrate on
the Mediterranean area and the Asian developments
as well. Of course, there were also very
important cultures—in fact, cultures—in the
Americas: the Mayans, Aztecs, and Incas. And the
Mayan culture is particularly interesting because
they had a very interesting arithmetic and quite a
sophisticated calendar reckoning and corresponding
astronomy. So in Central America, the Mayan
culture—well, it had been around from at least
2000 BC, but there was a classic period from 250
AD to 900 AD when things really developed in a
rather sophisticated way. And we know that they
had a so-called vigesimal system, which is base
20, and it was actually relatively efficiently
written down with only three symbols—more or
less a symbol for zero, which was this sort of odd
kind of eye-shaped thing (and in fact, there were
quite a lot of variants on the way of writing that
zero), and then there was a dot which represented
one, and a horizontal bar which represented
five. So they would count zero, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, like this, six like this, up to 19. And then
after 19, well, then they had a base 20 system.
So these were sort of the basic digits that they
would use, and then they would have these things
stacked up in a vertical system, not a horizontal
one. And they were very interested in astronomy
and calendars, and that explains a little bit
that their system for stacking things up was
not quite what you would expect in a base-20
system. There was an important twist involved.
So here, for example, is a Maya number. So we
see these symbols stacked one on top of each
other. We recognize this one here as the symbol
for 11—it has two fives and the one. And then
there's a zero, and then there's a two, and then
there's a three. So what do these various things
represent? Well, the bottom one was 11, or 11
ones, and here we have 02s, but the next level
does not correspond, as we might imagine, to 20
squared. This next level actually represents how
many 360s we have, so this would mean that there
are 2 times 360, and the next level represented
20 times 360. So after this, we keep multiplying
by 20, but we have this basic 360. So this means
that we have 3 times 20 times 360s, so I think
that's a total of 22,361. So there's certainly
an unevenness to these levels—we have ones, and
then 20s, and then 360s, and then 20 times 360s,
20 squared times 360s, and so on. And the reason
for that is because they were very interested in
the calendar—they had a very good understanding
of astronomy and the year especially. So they
knew there were 365 days in a year, and so 360
was kind of the closest to that. So they had
a splitting up of the 360 into 18 periods of 20,
so it was 18 times 20, and then there were five
left over. And it was because of that 360
that appeared in their calendar that they
had a number system that kind of reflected
that aspect of things. So their numbering,
or their numerology, I think, was very closely
connected somehow with the year, days, and time.
So as an idea of their accuracy, they knew
that the solar year actually was a little
bit more than 365 days, and effectively they
knew that, in our language, it was 365.2420,
while our current understanding is that it's
365.242198. So this is pretty impressive, kind
of accuracy, in their understanding. So the Mayans
did have a symbol for zero, and they used that in
their positional representation of numbers,
not so much different from the Babylonians.
Now, what about the ancient Greeks, who
were, of course, sort of the powerhouse
of ancient mathematics in terms of developing the
geometry and mathematics that we know today? Well,
their arithmetic was not as impressive as
their geometry. They certainly knew a lot of
interesting things about arithmetic, but their
actual notational arithmetical tools that they
had were not always very powerful. In fact,
often they would use the Babylonian system to
make calculations. They had a kind of an alphabet
kind of system where they represented numbers by
letters of the alphabet, but this was cumbersome,
and they did find that the Babylonian system was
useful to borrow. But we can also see that they
philosophically were not inclined to think about
zero as a very important concept. Philosophically,
they did not like or were mistrustful of this idea
of the void or nothing, and maybe we can attribute
that a little bit to their emphasis on geometry.
So, for example, if you have a very geometrical
approach to numbers, which they did—they liked
to think about numbers as being represented by
physical or geometrical patterns or designs. So,
for example, triangular numbers figured
prominently in their thinking: 1, 3, 6, 10,
and so on. And if you're thinking about something
like triangular numbers represented in this very
physical way with these little triangular piles
of circles, then it's not very natural for you to
want to consider zero. Zero doesn't really figure
in this because it's clear that this pattern of
triangular numbers really ought to start with
one—that's the starting point, and that's the
next one, and that's the next one. It's somehow
unnatural to talk about zero in this context.
So aside from their geometrical inclination, they
also had very strong ideas about philosophy. They
thought very deeply about what the world was
really about, and they came to this conclusion
that it was not really proper to try to
make something out of nothing, right? So,
you know, the idea of nothing or a void was not
sufficiently rich to be able to convert that into
something. And in some sense, that's what we're
doing, right? When we're thinking about zero,
we're thinking about nothing, and then we're
writing a symbol to represent that nothing,
and then that symbol becomes something that
we manipulate along with other numbers.
So in some way, we're creating something out of
nothing by the use of a modern symbol like this,
but the Greeks did not like that way of
thinking. They thought of both infinity
and the void as things to be avoided
conceptually—they were problematic.
So this philosophical orientation was well
expressed by a prominent Greek philosopher,
Parmenides, who was a big influence on
Plato, and he wrote on this topic in a
number of different places. So here are some
quotes from Parmenides. He says that "it is
necessary to speak and to think about what
is, for being is, but nothing is not." Okay,
this is in the direction of "we should
talk about things which actually are;
we can't talk about things which
are not, because they're not."
Another quote: "Nothing comes from nothing"—this
idea that you can't take nothing, that concept
nothing, and create something out of it. That's a
vacuous kind of activity; you shouldn't do that.
So we also read from him that "for this view that
that which is not exists can never predominate."
He's saying that the idea that we can consider
that which is not—so that which is not—and
actually objectify that and create something
out of it, that's not a valid way of thinking.
So Parmenides had a big influence on Plato, who
actually named one of his dialogues after him, and
this really, you know, was representative of the
Greek way of thinking and explains to some extent
why theirs was not a fertile arithmetic for this
idea of a symbol for zero to develop and blossom.
I'd like to mention also that the Hebrew
tradition is also in this direction. So
in the Hebrew tradition, the void
is also treated with suspicion,
and one tries to avoid it. So the void
is considered to be a state of separation
from God. So first there was the void, and
then there was God creating other stuff,
and so the void is some kind of thing that
we want to stay away from—it's not pleasant.
So there's a philosophical orientation
that is very close to people's thinking
about this subject. You know, what
does it mean to contemplate nothing,
for example? What would the world be like if
there was nothing? It's a very profound question,
and people have been thinking about
these kinds of things for a long time,
and one's orientation towards this kind
of philosophical position would naturally
influence one's mathematics and the kind
of mathematics that one might want to do.
And so now we come to the heroes of this
story—the culture that really introduced
zero the way we know it now. And now we
recognize that this was a fundamentally,
crucially important development in the history
of science, and I have talked about that in a
previous video on the Hindu-Arabic numbers. So
we're talking about ancient Indian philosophy,
religion, and mathematics. The Indus Valley
culture goes back to around 3,000 BC,
but we have evidence to suggest that they were
thinking along somewhat modern lines around 350
BC, where the Brahmi notation for numerals was
starting to look pretty similar to the modern
system. And they had a positional base 10 system
that was in place around 500 AD. So here are some
original kind of numerals—you can sort of see some
similarities with some of our current numbers.
Now, what's interesting in the Indian
point of view here, amongst other things,
is that their philosophical orientation seemed
to predispose them to being happy with the idea
of thinking about nothing as a legitimate
object for study and incorporating it into
mathematics. The Indians were not afraid of
nothing, philosophically. In fact, they had a
kind of reverence for it—they were very
comfortable with the idea of nothingness and
emptiness. Maybe simplistically we could say that
nothing was viewed as a state from which we arise,
and it's a state that we eventually return
to. So maybe from an Indian point of view,
there's nothing to be afraid of—it's a
sort of natural part of the whole story.
In any case, in Sanskrit, they had lots
of different words representing different
aspects of emptiness, void, nothing,
and so on. So they conceptually had a
framework in which nothing naturally played a
reasonable role, and this was then, of course,
very crucial in this development after they
had these numbers, to eventually introduce
actually a symbol for zero that turned out to
be another number, essentially on par with the
ones that they already had. So we have evidence
that a dot for zero was in place around 200 BC,
and that gradually was then replaced with the more
familiar round circle zero. And by around 500 AD,
it was in place as a placeholder in a decimal
system pretty much the same as we have today.
And then we come to Brahmagupta, a prominent
Indian mathematician and astronomer,
who around 628 AD took an important additional
step to establish zero not just as a placeholder
in a notational system for more general numbers,
but actually to recognize that zero was an entity
that had an independence—it had a role to play.
And that role, in fact, turned out to be a rather
important one in arithmetic. So that zero could
be the result of an arithmetical computation: so
5 - 5 equals 0. That is then an equation that you
could actually write down, whereas formerly it was
difficult to say that 3 + 0 = 3. You can multiply
by 0: 0 times 7 = 0. You can subtract 0 from
something: 4 - 0 is 4. In fact, he even discusses
division by zero and had an understanding that if
you take a number and you divide by zero,
you're getting something like infinite.
All right, so this is a very huge step.
And I've talked about, you know, the importance
of the Hindu-Arabic system in many places,
and it's really not possible to overestimate
the importance of this whole development in
the modern world. The world that we
live in, the highly technological,
mathematical world, rests very
solidly on this—well, to us,
it seems relatively simple and straightforward
because we've been taught from a very early age,
over and over and over again, how this numerical
system works. But it's actually full of subtlety
and richness, this Hindu-Arabic system, and the
zero, of course, plays a very important role.
Now, if we move ahead to European times, to
more modern times, the role of nothing or
zero was still actually quite contentious
in the 16th, 17th, and 18th centuries,
where people were examining the physical universe
much more carefully. And, for example, questions
about whether it was possible to consider empty
space or not were being discussed. So the ancient
Greeks had reservations about being able to treat
empty space as something sort of independent of
other stuff. But 17th and 18th-century scientists
started investigating the possibility of thinking
about space as being free from any stuff inside
it—trying to create a vacuum, for example. And
in the framework of Newton's laws, I mean,
these are sort of operating in sort of empty
space quite happily. But if we fast forward then
again to 20th-century physics, things become then
again more complicated, and the confidence and the
certainty that maybe 19th-century mathematicians
had about the void or vacuum started going in
the other direction again, and people started
becoming more aware that this was still a rather
problematic concept and actually full of subtlety.
So in modern 20th-century physics, the
vacuum is treated as a really central but
very complicated and rich kind of concept. So
to the modern physicist, the vacuum is full of
possibilities—it's not at all just empty space
and nothing in it. So this is largely due to
the role of quantum mechanics and a certain
principle called the uncertainty principle,
which roughly tells us that we can't really
know everything about a situation, let's say,
right? And that goes for any kind of
situation, even a situation where it
looks like there might be nothing in it. So
if you have a situation where you have some
empty piece of space and there's nothing in it,
you still can't know everything about it. And
that can be interpreted as saying that there's a
lowest possible energy sort of for empty space,
but you can't really make that energy completely
zero—there's always some energy there. That's
a kind of a bottom possible energy, but that
supports various strange things that might happen.
So in the modern vacuum, physicists think that
there are all these simultaneous creations and
annihilations of particle and antiparticle
pairs that are sort of instantaneously
happening where we, you know, have a little
bit of empty space and suddenly there's an
electron and a positron. So an electron has
an antiparticle called a positron, and these
things can be created sort of out of nothing,
more or less, and then shortly thereafter,
they can then annihilate each other and go back
to nothing. So this quantum vacuum is sort of
seething with all these possibilities of these
particles emerging for a short period of time,
and so on. So it's a very rich and mysterious
kind of concept. So the modern physicist now
is returning to not being so sure what nothing
means, actually, in the kind of physical world.
And so this is a very interesting story about
nothing, and I think the last word has not
been said. And I would like to really emphasize
the possibility that maybe even in mathematics,
which is at least potentially independent of these
quantum mysteries, even in mathematics there's the
potential room for thinking about nothing or the
void in a different or an additional way to what
we already have. So I don't necessarily want
to change the role of zero, which is a great,
you know, very important concept in our
number system and so on, but I do want us
to think more liberally about the possible role
of nothing—a more fundamental kind of nothing
than actually zero. So zero is still something
that's been created out of nothing, but I want
to propose that there's room in mathematics
for nothing, which is still just nothing,
okay? It hasn't been converted into something.
We don't have to create something from nothing;
we can think about nothing itself, and
that can be a concept that can help us.
And so, okay, that's what I want to do—I want
to introduce nothing into mathematics again,
but in a more primitive, fundamental, really void
kind of fashion. I think there's a role to play,
and that is especially clear when we have
this multiset point of view that we're
getting used to here. So in our next video,
I want to talk about nothing in a multiset
context and why mathematics really does
need new thinking about nothing. I hope
you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]